---
layout: post
title: Systems Thinkpiece
date: 2017-02-13
---

![](/images/systems-thinkpiece/strangelove-war-room.jpg)

Luminaries in the technology industry love to trumpet
[systems thinking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_thinking). A
“systems thinker” is one who possesses the ability to reason
holistically about the relationships between independent components of
a system. This notion is recursive in the sense that each component
may itself be a system composed of interconnected parts.

In practice, companies tout systems thinking as a means towards the
nebulous ideal of “innovation”. We like to hire “systems thinkers”
because our companies are complex, special organizations that need to
be properly cared for and fed by smart people. But really, I think
that _true_ systems thinking manifests elsewhere in a corporate
setting. An enlightened company thinks of ways to minimize their
adverse impact on customers’ lives and society as a whole. Such a
company may disrupt their _competition_, but leave society intact, if
not improved.

Two examples, admittedly focusing on the negative because it’s easier
to call attention to:

- The fast food industry is bad at systems thinking. Their success is
  inversely correlated with the physical health of their customers.
- The financial industry has a centuries-long track record of being
  bad at systems thinking. Time and time again, recessions are caused
  by the over-exploitation of markets and people. In terms of systems,
  expressions of laissez faire capitalism show a contemptible
  disregard for the consequences of exploitative actions on powerless
  people.

## Tech

How does the technology industry fair when viewed through this lens?
To frame the current moment in history, I think technologists’
collective vision of the future has come into stark contrast with
reality. Look at basically any peppy video advertisement from a
startup and you’ll see a world inhabited solely by affluent,
tech-savvy people. The primary motivators when these people make
purchasing decisions are the degree to which a product or service can
make them feel “connected” and maximally productive.

This vision, one in which Maslow’s hierarchy itself has been
disrupted, isn’t a vision that represents the bulk of humanity. In its
dominant guise driven by venture capitalists, I don’t think Silicon
Valley is as good at thinking about systems as it thinks it is.

Specifically, the current iteration of the tech industry fails to take
into account and plan for the societal impact of its offerings. We
want a driverless future, but it’s not our job to think about how
we’ll maintain the livelihood and dignity of taxi-, truck-, and
bus-drivers. We want an open and universal communications network, but
refuse to acknowledge our consequent role in defending the truth and
policing hate speech. We want to institute a sharing/gig economy, but
give zero thought into how this would impact the health care system or
how people find time to raise children amid a workweek full of
discontinuous tasks carried out for rich people.

## Closing

When the financial industry’s unchecked expansion into predatory
lending cratered the global economy, we were up in arms, calling for
heads to roll. Now, by giving a megaphone populists, social media has
helped put an authoritarian administration in the White House and the
specter of white supremacy back into the mainstream. What is to be
done when the leadership at Facebook and Twitter fail to even
acknowledge their platforms’ inadvertent role in these developments?*

We can’t build an equitable future when the powers that drive the
narrative (namely, prominent executives and VCs) fail to recognize
technology’s adverse effects. When will Silicon Valley have its
Oppenheimer moment?

---

*Thanks to [Marc Hedlund](https://twitter.com/marcprecipice) for
reading and providing feedback on drafts of this essay.*

---

\* I realize that this is reductive. Also, the massive outpouring of
activism since the election would be impossible without social media,
so the megaphone goes both ways.
