---
layout: post
title: Aiming for sustainability
date: 2017-03-21
---

[My last post](/2017/02/systems-thinkpiece/) dealt with the subject of
“systems thinking”, claiming that its fashionableness in the tech
industry doesn’t jive with the amount of collateral damage being
racked up by prominent companies.

I wanted to follow up with a post that doesn’t spend 600 words tearing
down other people’s work. To that end, I’d like to pose the question
of what a company would look like if it were to truly espouse systems
thinking.

To characterize a possible outline of such a company, I think that it
comes down to developing a sustainable business model before being
coerced by market forces to make the business work by any means
necessary.

## Sustainability

The word “sustainability” ceased to convey meaning years ago. It’s
become more of a Boy Scout merit badge than an objective against which
key results can be measured.

But to take a step back and define our terms, for a process to be
sustainable, it must be capable of continuous operation without the
aid of external forces. In the realm of business, the process to be
sustained is _growth_, presumably of revenue. A firm can’t simply
remain in operation to be considered successful—it must keep pace with
(or beat) the greater economy.

This fact of business life provides the primary point of pressure on
management—growth must be sustained, if not accelerated, or else it’s
your head.

A company must overcome this pressure in order to have the luxury of
even _considering_ its adverse impacts on society. A management team
kept up at night by fear of investor insurrection is not one that’s
apt to fret about automation’s impact on the working class.

A company that fails to overcome this pressure is akin to a truck
rolling downhill with its breaks cut. As more people pin their hopes
and dreams to the company, management starts to lose political capital
and control of their own destiny. As things get dicier, it starts
looking preferable to steer the truck towards the crowded intersection
in order to stay on the road instead of maintaining course at the
brick wall ahead of you.

A business earns the luxury of considering social impact by enacting a
successful business model. A sustainable bottom line is the price of
entry.

## Luck

That sounds all well and great, but one does not simply “enact a
successful business model”. This is a very difficult thing that most
management teams fail to do.

Two contrived examples of how this may occur:

1. As a consequence of identifying a problem that your team is
   uniquely capable of solving, you achieve bottom line growth before
   investors lose patience.
2. You raise money from folks that trust you deeply, and this trust
   allows you to invest early capital in experimentation in pursuit of
   a sustainable business model.

Both of these scenarios involve quite a bit of luck. But this luck is
_earned_, either by the team’s execution on a suitable problem or by
building and leveraging trusted relationships.

## Alignment

To me, the crux of this process is wrapped up in the motivations of a
founding team. A team motivated by the fashionableness of starting a
company as a get-rich-quick scheme is not one that’s likely to be
mindful of negative externalities.

I contend that you’re better off executing on a problem that you find
truly meaningful and likely to have a positive impact on
society. These characteristics do not supersede the requirement of
making money, but can be thought of as filters on the paths down which
a company may traverse.

Starting a company is hard work. Minimizing a company's exploitative
fallout on society requires patience, some amount of privilege, and
fundamental alignment among the founding team.

*Thanks to [Oren Schetrit](https://www.linkedin.com/in/oschetrit) for
reading and providing feedback on drafts of this essay.*
