---
layout: post
title: My Climate Lobby Hobby
date: 2019-03-29
---

In a departure from this blog’s typical tech-related content, I’d like
to write about some work I’ve done outside of the confines of my day
job(s).

![](/images/my-climate-lobby-hobby/CCL-Logo-H2.png)

For the past few years, I’ve volunteered as a member of an
organization called the [Citizens’ Climate
Lobby](https://citizensclimatelobby.org/). CCL is a non-partisan,
non-profit advocacy group whose mission is to build political will for
solutions to climate change. Specifically, the group is laser-focussed
on lobbying Congress to enact a policy called [Carbon Fee and
Dividend](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fee_and_dividend). This policy
would make it more expensive for companies to extract and import
fossil fuels, and thus help steer the economy towards better, cleaner
sources of energy.

The hook of the policy (in contrast to others like
California’s cap-and-trade system) is that the revenue generated by
the carbon tax would be distributed evenly to the populace, as monthly
dividend checks to all US citizens [[1]](#fn1).

To cut to the chase, I’m excitedly writing this post because my
congresswoman, Rep. Barbara Lee, this week co-sponsored the bill we’ve
been lobbying for, [the Energy Innovation and Carbon Dividend
Act](https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/763). This
is the culmination of many meetings and calls with congressional
staff, letters to the editor, town hall appearances, fliers handed out
at farmers’ markets, and alliance-building with other environmental
groups. This achievement for our local CCL chapter here in Alameda
County is one among many that are happening all over the country
(_including_ red districts) as we build a base of bipartisan support
for this carbon pricing policy.

![](/images/my-climate-lobby-hobby/feb2019_lee_lobby_meeting.jpg)<span
 class="figure_caption">Fig. 1. Photo of our team at a recent lobbying
 meeting at Rep. Lee’s office in Oakland.</span>

That's my story. I’m really proud of this accomplishment for our
chapter and I wanted to share it. Getting involved with CCL has been a
desperately-needed breath of fresh air amid the toxic political
climate and news cycle we’re all living in. And it’s been a great way
to meet inspiring people and learn the ground game of activism.

There are glimmers of hope for representative democracy in America,
and it looks a lot like the Citizens’ Climate Lobby.

*Thanks to [Dr. Ted Obbard](https://www.drtedobbard.com/), chapter
co-lead of [CCL Alameda](http://cclalameda.org), for reading and
providing feedback on drafts of this essay.*

<section class="footnotes">
<p id="fn1">[1] There are <a
href="https://citizensclimatelobby.org/remi-report/">a bunch</a> of
features that make the policy great, regardless of which side of the
aisle you’re on. It’s effective because it would drastically and
rapidly reduce carbon emissions. It’s good for the economy, given that
it doesn’t increase the size of the government. It’s forecasted to
create millions of jobs and it give companies predictable targets for
fuel prices. And by putting money directly into people’s pockets every
month, it’s an equitable solution that <a
href="https://citizensclimatelobby.org/household-impact-study/">disproportionally</a>
helps out households in the lower end of the income spectrum.</p>
</section>
